{id=2725, content=Adulterers and prostitutes could be executed and women were agreed to be more libidinous than men – then in the 18th century attitudes to sex underwent an extraordinary change. We believe in sexual freedom. We take it for granted that consenting men and women have the right to do what they like with their bodies. Sex is everywhere in our culture. We love to think and talk about it; we devour news about celebrities' affairs; we produce and consume pornography on an unprecedented scale. We think it wrong that in other cultures its discussion is censured, people suffer for their sexual orientation, women are treated as second-class citizens, or adulterers are put to death. Yet a few centuries ago, our own society was like this too. In the 1600s people were still being executed for adultery in England, Scotland and north America, and across Europe. Everywhere in the west, sex outside marriage was illegal, and the church, the state and ordinary people devoted huge efforts to hunting it down and punishing it. This was a central feature of Christian society, one that had grown steadily in importance since late antiquity. So how and when did our culture change so strikingly? Where does our ...}
{id=4504, content=Body posture influences our estimations of quantity The mind and body are usually thought of as separate entities but they are, in fact, intimately linked. The mind controls the body, of course, but the relationship is reciprocal – the body also influences the mind in mysterious ways, such that our thoughts and emotions are grounded in our bodily sensations and movements. We now know, for example, that the sense of touch can influence our social judgements and decisions; that ambient temperature affects how we perceive relationships with others; and that movements can affect the rate at which memories are recalled, as well as the emotional content of the memories. A team of psychologists from Erasmus University in Rotterdam now reports that body posture can unconsciously influence our estimates of quantities. According to the mental number line theory, we think of numbers along a horizontal line with small numbers on the left and larger ones to the right. Rather than being specific to certain cultures, this seems to occur universally and may be due to the way in which the brain represents numbers. With this in mind, Anita Eerland and her colleagues hypothesized that secretly ...}
{id=4584, content=Kader Arif, the lead Acta negotiator in the European Parliament, says Acta potentially cuts access to lifesaving generic drugs and restricts online freedom. The French MEP who resigned his position in charge of negotiating the international Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement (Acta) has said it "goes too far" by potentially cutting access to lifesaving generic drugs and restricting internet freedom. In an exclusive interview with the Guardian, Kader Arif – a member of the European parliament's international trade group, who was the lead negotiator over Acta – said that despite talks over the agreement having begun in 2007, "the European parliament, which represents the rights of the people, had no access to this mandate, neither had it information of the position defended by the commission or the demands of the other parties to the agreement". Arif resigned in protest on 26 January as the EU signed the treaty, saying that he wished to "denounce in the strongest manner the process that led to the signing of this agreement: no association of civil society [and] lack of transparency from the beginning". He said that it now threatens online freedom, access to the use of generic ...}
{id=13165, content=Scientists in Edinburgh who pioneered cloning have made a technological breakthrough that could pave the way for better medical treatment of mental illnesses and nerve diseases. The news that Edinburgh scientists had created the world's first cloned mammal, Dolly the sheep, at the university's Roslin Institute made headlines around the world 16 years ago. Her birth raised hopes of the creation of a new generation of medicines – with a host of these breakthroughs occurring at laboratories in the university over the following decade. And now one of the most spectacular has taken place at Edinburgh's Centre for Regenerative Medicine, where scientists have continued to develop the technology used to make Dolly. In a series of remarkable experiments, they have created brain tissue from patients suffering from schizophrenia, bipolar depression and other mental illnesses. The work offers spectacular rewards for doctors. From a scrap of skin taken from a patient, they can make neurones genetically identical to those in that person's brain. These brain cells, grown in the laboratory, can then be studied to reveal the neurological secrets of their condition. "A patient's neurones can tell us ...}
{id=5938, content=The long border with Iraq undermines US and EU efforts to stop Iran's nuclear programme with trade sanctions. The US and EU have announced new sanctions in the hope of persuading Iran to abandon its alleged nuclear weapons programme, though how effective these will be is questionable. China, India, Russia, Turkey, Japan, and South Korea have already refused to go along with the new measures. Iran also has the means to evade the sanctions – through its proximity to Iraq. Iran has often been singled out as the main beneficiary of the US-led invasion of Iraq, as well as the biggest threat to Iraq's stability in the post-Saddam era. Iran's uninterrupted support for Shia militia groups in southern Iraq, particularly the Mahdi army, is seen as one indication of its involvement in Iraqi politics and its ability to cause problems for adversaries. And yet Iran's key interest in Iraq is less about realpolitik than about trade. Iran is one of Iraq's most important regional economic partners, with an annual trade volume between the two sides standing at $8bn to $10bn (£5bn to £6.4bn). However, it is Iraq's 910-mile border with Iran, and therefore its geographical suitability as a smuggling hub ...}
{id=3775, content=I hope that fear of terrorism will not lead to the suppression of valuable research about engineering the H5N1 virus. A few months ago, Dutch virologist Ron Fouchier made what he hoped would be a low-key announcement at a conference on influenza in Malta. After a series of painstaking experiments, Fouchier announced he had achieved the holy grail of influenza research: engineering the H5N1 bird flu virus so that it could pass easily between mammals. The "airborne" virus had been created, Fouchier explained, not by using sophisticated, lab-based genetic technology but by the relatively low-tech method of passaging H5N1 repeatedly through ferrets. The significance of the discovery was not lost on the assembled delegates. If ferrets could be infected this way, then so could humans. Fouchier had realised the World Health Organisation's worst nightmare. However, that might have been the end of the story were it not for a resourceful journalist at Science, who – seeing a potential headline – tracked Fouchier down to his lab at the Erasmus Medical Centre in Rotterdam in November and got him to explain in more detail precisely how his team had created "probably one of the most dangerous ...}
{id=7784, content=Banning embryonic stem cell patents not only imperils Europe's competitiveness but also the protection of human rights. The full implications of the recent ban on stem cell patents by the Grand Chamber of the Court of Justice of the European Union could take a long time to assess. From a legal perspective, the court's ruling is seriously flawed. In a case brought by Greenpeace against the German neuroscientist Oliver Bruestle, the EU court controversially ruled that an unclear and much litigated prohibition in EU patent law on "commercial and industrial uses of human embryos" applies to therapeutic products and therapies containing embryonic cells when the derivation of the cells or lines originally required the destruction of human embryos. At a stroke, the court's judgment has made it impossible to patent research that is lawfully practised in a substantial number of EU states, including research on established cell lines that were ethically obtained with the consent of donors and publicly funded by member states and the EU itself. There are no commercial or industrial uses, or "farming" of human embryos in Europe. This alone should have set alarm bells ringing in the judges' ...}
{id=9977, content=UN panel calls for sustainable development indicators that factor in poverty, inequality, science and gender equality. Social and environmental costs need to be integrated into measurement of economic activity, a new UN report said on Monday as it urged world leaders to focus on the long-term resilience of the planet and its people. The report from the high-level panel on global sustainability calls for a set of sustainable development indicators that go beyond the traditional approach of gross domestic product. It recommends that governments develop and apply a set of sustainable development goals that can mobilise global action. At the report's launch during the AU summit, Ban Ki-moon, the UN secretary-general, made it plain that sustainable development is a top priority for his second term of office. "We need to chart a new, more sustainable course for the future, one that strengthens equality and economic growth while protecting our planet," he said. Ban established a 22-member panel in August 2010, co-chaired by Finland's president Tarja Halonen and Jacob Zuma, the president of South Africa. The group was tasked with producing a blueprint for sustainable development and ...}
{id=3819, content=Some of the physicist's greatest hits – from singularities in gravitational collapse to a quantum theory of gravity. 1970, Singularities in gravitational collapse. Physicists working on Einstein's theory of gravity noticed that it allowed for singularities – points where spacetime appeared to be infinitely curved. But it was unclear whether singularities were real or not. Roger Penrose at Birkbeck College in London proved that singularities would indeed form in black holes. Later, Penrose and Hawking applied the same idea to the whole universe and showed that Einstein's theory predicted a singularity in our distant past. It was the big bang. 1971-72 Black hole mechanics Black holes have their own set of laws that mirror the more familiar laws of thermodynamics. Hawking came up with the second law, which states that the total surface area of a black hole will never get smaller, at least so far as classical (as opposed to quantum) physics is concerned. Also known as the Hawking area theorem, it created a puzzle for physicists. The law implied that black holes were hot, a contradiction of classical physics that said black holes could not radiate heat. In separate work, Hawking worked on ...}
{id=11143, content=Cern physicists are on tenterhooks as experiment sets out to confirm or rule out the existence of the Higgs boson. This Tuesday is an important day at Cern, the European Organisation for Nuclear Research. The scientists at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) will present the latest results on the search for the Higgs boson, the fabled particle with the big job of explaining how nature's elementary particles acquire mass. The collider has been built to teach us all about how the tiny particles that make up everything in the universe behave. At 27km in circumference it represents the biggest, most powerful, microscope in the world – zooming in to reveal the goings-on at distances tiny compared even to the size of a single proton. At these femtoscopically small distances, we have very good reason to expect great things: either we will see a Higgs particle or we will see something else. Seeing nothing new is simply not an option. So what makes us so sure the LHC is in a win-win situation? The "standard model" theory of particle physics is as dazzlingly ambitious as its name is bland – its remit is to explain how every single particle in the universe interacts with every other (with the sad ...}
{id=4094, content=If the monetary union does survive, in the form now planned by EU leaders, the cure could turn out to be worse than the disease. The start of 2012 marks the second time the euro has reached its 10th birthday. From a technical and financial point of view, the single currency was launched on 1 January 1999, when all financial claims in the currencies of the first eleven member states were converted into euros. Three years later this unification became "visible" to European citizens as euro notes and coin replaced those of the member states. In the runup to the first 10-year anniversary, Jean-Claude Trichet, then president of the European Central Bank (ECB) claimed that the euro had "helped to protect the euro area economy from the many global shocks and considerable turbulence of the last few years". The mood at the second anniversary could hardly be more different. Unresolved crises in the eurozone, and its very problematic future, have become the most serious source of shocks and turbulence in the global economy. Trichet claimed at the same time that monetary union had been good for employment: "Between the launch of the euro and the end of 2007, the euro area created more than 15 ...}
{id=6474, content=Leading scientists, including climate change experts, complain about opinion piece akin to 'dentists practising cardiology'. The Wall Street Journal has received a dressing down from a large group of leading scientists for promoting retrograde and out-of-date views on climate change. In an opinion piece run by the Journal on Wednesday, nearly 40 scientists, including acknowledged climate change experts, took on the paper for publishing an article disputing the evidence on global warming. The offending article, No Need to Panic About Global Warming, which appeared last week, argued that climate change was a cunning ploy deployed by governments to raise taxes and by non-profit organisations to solicit donations to save the planet. It was signed by 16 scientists who don't subscribe to the conventional wisdom that climate change is happening and is largely man-made - but as Wednesday's letter points out, many of those who signed don't actually work in climate science. "Do you consult your dentist on your heart condition? In science, as in any area, reputations are based on knowledge and expertise in a field, and on published, peer-reviewed work. If you need surgery, you want a highly ...}
{id=322, content=The symbolic clock face, maintained since 1947 by the board of directors of the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists at the University of Chicago, counts down to nuclear armageddon. The world tiptoed closer to the apocalypse on Tuesday as scientists moved the Doomsday Clock one minute closer to the zero hour. The symbolic clock now stands at five minutes to midnight, the scientists said, because of a collective failure to stop the spread of nuclear weapons, act on climate change, or find safe and sustainable sources of energy – as exemplified by the Fukushima nuclear disaster. The rare bright points the scientists noted were the Arab spring and movement in Russia for greater democracy. The clock, maintained by the Bulletin of Atomic Scientists, has been gauging our proximity to global disaster since 1947, using the potent image of a clock counting down the minutes to destruction. Until Tuesday afternoon, the clock had been set at six minutes to midnight. "It is five minutes to midnight," the scientists said. "Two years ago it appeared that world leaders might address the truly global threats we face. In many cases, that trend has not continued or been reversed." The Bulletin was ...}
{id=6366, content=More workable forms of capitalism will not appear without a wholesale reassessment of ideology, institutions and regulations. Suddenly, debating the nature of capitalism has become mainstream politics. The most important starting point is that capitalism is not just one phenomenon; it comes in many varieties, in different places and different times. There is no point, then, in getting bogged down in arguments about capitalism versus communism. The question is: what sort of capitalism do we have and what sort do we want? Many commentators, such as Richard Sennett, have identified "the new capitalism" as the economic system that developed from the early 1970s. It gained momentum for many, highly complex, reasons, but it did not develop by chance: it arose initially out of the abandonment of the Bretton Woods agreement in 1971 – a system that had regulated international finance since the end of the second world war. This itself arose mainly as a result of the costs of the Vietnam war. It was not the result of some natural law or an act of God: it came from decisions made by human beings. Innumerable further policy decisions, especially during the 1980s, cemented this new capitalism. ...}
{id=11299, content=Two former lovers explain what went wrong. Her story: Andreea Magdalina, 23, lives in London. She is an online community manager and is currently single. I was in London and he was in Romania, where I'm from. We started talking on Facebook about a musical artist we both liked. He was moving to London and we decided to meet. The day after he landed we met in Oxford Circus. I was super-excited. I watched him from the shadows before saying hi. He was handsome and very cool. At first I felt he made me a better person. I'm quite cold and rational minded; he'd give me flowers and was always asking how my day was. But there wasn't much adrenalin, and he was just too emotional for me. When things started getting serious, I ran away. I felt responsible for his happiness; he was giving me so much and I felt obliged to give something back. We ended it on the phone one night. The next day we met at a tube station – he gave me my things and we just hugged. It was so sad. I tell him if he has problems that I'm there. But he never tells me anything, and I don't blame him. I still have feelings that are more than just caring – I wouldn't let that slip into anything more, though. He deserves a very ...}
{id=10879, content=The president of the European Council is spreading a little happiness among his fellow world leaders this year. Age: 64. Appearance: As happy as Larry. Who is he? He's the guy we use to measure happiness. Not Larry. Who's this Van Rompuy bloke? Oh. He's the former Belgian prime minister and current president of the European Council. Never heard of him. He's the one who published his own book of haikus. Oh him. And why's he happy? Because it's Christmas, and he's got a gift he can't wait to give. Which is? The World Book of Happiness. And how do you know he can't wait to give it? Because he has already sent it out to just about everyone on his crimbo list – including David Cameron, Nicolas Sarkozy, Barack Obama and dozens of other world leaders. Must be a pretty good book then. Either that or he found a stash of them lying around the office and snuck a load out the back door while everyone was busy panicking over the eurozone. Seems more likely it's just a good book. Yes, it does. So what is it? Some fancy new prize-winning novel? It's a collection of short, factual essays on well-being and positive psychology by 100 of the world's leading happiness experts, picked from 50 different ...}
{id=4701, content=For actor Ray Fearon there is no trick to learning lines, it's all in the rehearsal of them. I can guarantee this to you: every single actor has had a dream of walking on stage on press night and realising that they don't know their lines. I find that there isn't any trick to learning them. The script looks huge when you first get it, but you just have to go home and drill the lines out. The more you read it, the shorter it gets. I usually read it at least four times. In the theatre, you go over your lines quite a lot in rehearsals, and you have the blocking process, where you work out where you'll move on stage, so that puts helpful landmarks in your head as well. I was taught to keep the script in my hand for as long as possible, and to keep looking at it even when I don't need to. I was at the RSC for 10 years, so this habit is really ingrained. I normally go through every single line as part of my warm-up before a show. When I'm working on a film or TV programme, there often isn't a rehearsal, so I tend to learn my lines much later. They are often shorter, too, so they're essentially just there. On very rare occasions, I do forget something on stage, but only for a split ...}
{id=6046, content='The New Zealand police thought we had done it as a publicity stunt.' Peter Willcox, 58, was captain of the Greenpeace ship Rainbow Warrior when it was sunk in Auckland in 1985 by the French secret service. We were moored when I was woken shortly before midnight by a massive jolt. My first thought was that we had been in a collision. I grabbed a towel, and 40 seconds after the explosion I was standing by the engine room. The water was almost up to the main deck. I went back out and it was about then that the second bomb went off. I just said, "Abandon ship. Everybody off now." As I stood on the edge of the dock watching the boat sink, Davey Edward, the chief engineer, came up and said, "Fernando is down there." At the time I doubted it, mostly because I wanted to. Fernando Pereira, a photographer and member of our crew, often went off the boat to enjoy the local nightlife. Davey and I went back on board. I tried to go down through the bridge, but the boat was completely filled with water. Then the fire department ordered us off. A member of our crew offered to get a dive tank, but the water was full of diesel, it was cold and black, and I had no idea where to look for Fernando. ...}